---
layout: post
title: "IPCC AR6 WGI Chapter11"
date: 2025-10-08 9:00:00 +0900
tags: [Article, IPCC]
---


**2025.10.08 ~ 2025.10.??**


# 0. Executive Summary
This chapter from the IPCC's Sixth Assessment Report (AR6) evaluates changes in weather and climate extremes. It is an **established fact** that human-induced greenhouse gas emissions have increased the frequency and/or intensity of some extremes, particularly for temperature, since pre-industrial times. Evidence has strengthened since the Fifth Assessment Report (AR5) for changes in extreme precipitation, droughts, tropical cyclones, and compound events. It is now understood that some recent hot extremes would have been **extremely unlikely to occur without human influence** on the climate system.

Regional changes in the intensity and frequency of these extremes generally scale with **global warming**. Even small incremental increases in global warming (e.g., $+0.5^{\circ}C$) cause statistically significant changes in extremes on a global scale (*high confidence*). The occurrence of events **unprecedented** in the observed record will rise with increasing global warming, even at $1.5^{\circ}C$.

---
# 1. Introduction
## 1.1 What Are Extreme Events and How are Their Changes Studied?
Building on the SREX report and AR5, this Report defines an **extreme weather event** as 'an event that is rare at a particular place and time of year', and an **extreme climate event** as 'a pattern of extreme weather that persists for some time, such as a season'. The definitions of ‘**rare**’ are wide ranging, depending on applications. Some studies consider an event as an extreme if it is **unprecedented**; other studies consider events that occur several times a year as moderate extreme events. Rarity of an event with a fixed magnitude also changes under human-induced climate change, making events that are unprecedented so far rather probable under present conditions, but unique in the observational record – and thus often considered as ‘**surprises**’. To study these events, scientists define **thresholds** for extremes that can be either **relative** (e.g., the 90th percentile) or **absolute** (e.g., a temperature of $35^{\circ}C$).

## 1.2 Effects of Greenhouse Gas and Other External Forcings on Extremes
At the global scale, and also at the regional scale to some extent, many of the changes in extremes are a direct consequence of enhanced **radiative forcing**, and the associated **global warming** and/or resultant increase in the **water-holding capacity** of the atmosphere, as well as changes in vertical stability and meridional temperature gradients that affect climate dynamics.

Extreme temperatures on land tend to increase more than the global mean temperature. This is due in large part to the **land–sea warming contrast**, and additionally to regional feedbacks in some regions. The increase in the **intensity** of temperature extremes scales robustly, and in general linearly, with global warming. In contrast, the **frequency** of hot temperature extremes, the number of heatwave days, and the length of heatwave seasons in various regions scale nonlinearly with global mean temperature, often because of threshold effects.

Since AR5, event attribution studies have provided clear evidence that **greenhouse gases** and other **external forcings** have affected individual extreme weather events. However, many highly impactful extreme weather events have not been studied in the **event attribution framework**, particularly in the developing world, due to a lack of observational data and reliable climate models.

## 1.3 Effects of Large-scale Circulation on Changes in Extremes
The response of **large-scale circulation patterns** to external forcing can cascade to uncertainty in the response of extremes to those forcings. For example, the El Niño-Southern Oscillation (ENSO) influences precipitation, favoring droughts in some regions and heavy rains in others. There has been a **very likely widening of the Hadley circulation** since the 1980s, and the **extratropical jets and cyclone tracks** have **likely been shifting poleward** over the same period. This poleward expansion affects drought occurrence and shifts the tracks of tropical cyclones and storms. Although it is very likely that the amplitude of **ENSO variability** will not robustly change over the 21st century, the frequency of extreme ENSO events, defined by precipitation threshold, is projected to increase with global warming.

Ultimately, large-scale atmospheric circulation patterns are important drivers for local and regional extremes. However, there is overall *low confidence* about future changes in the magnitude, frequency, and spatial distribution of these patterns, which contributes to uncertainty in projected responses of extremes, especially in the near term.

## 1.4 Effects of Regional-scale Processes and Forcings and Feedbacks on Changes in Extremes
At the local and regional scales, changes in extremes are strongly modulated by **local and regional feedbacks**, changes in large-scale circulation patterns, and **regional forcings** such as changes in land use or aerosol concentrations.

The effects of **land-use forcing** may be particularly relevant in the context of low-emissions scenarios, which include large land-use modifications, for instance those associated with the expansion of biofuels, bioenergy with carbon capture and storage, or re-/afforestation to ensure negative emissions, as well as with the expansion of food production.

**Aerosol forcing** also has a strong regional footprint. From the 1950s to 1980s, aerosol-induced cooling delayed the timing of a significant human contribution to record-breaking heat extremes in some regions. However, the decreased aerosol loading since the 1990s has led to an accelerated warming of hot extremes in some regions like Western Europe.

Additionally, effects of **land surface conditions** on circulation patterns have also been reported. There are also feedbacks between soil moisture content and precipitation occurrence, generally characterized by negative spatial feedbacks and positive local feedbacks. In the Northern Hemisphere high latitudes, the **snow- and ice-albedo feedback**, along with other factors, is projected to largely amplify temperature increases.

Finally, extreme events may also regionally **amplify one another**. For example, this is the case for **heatwaves and droughts**, with high temperatures and stronger radiative forcing leading to drying tendencies on land due to increased evapotranspiration, and drier soils then inducing decreased evapotranspiration and higher sensible heat flux and hot temperatures.

In summary, regional forcings and feedbacks – in particular those associated with land use and aerosol forcings – and soil-moisture–temperature, soil moisture–precipitation, and snow/ice–albedo–temperature feedbacks, play an important role in modulating regional changes in extremes. These can also lead to a higher warming of extreme temperatures compared to mean temperature (*high confidence*), and possibly cooling in some regions (*medium confidence*). However, there is only *medium confidence* in the representation of the associated processes in state-of-the-art Earth System Models (ESMs).

---
# 2. Data and Methods
## 2.1 Definition of Extremes
In the literature, an event is generally considered extreme if the value of a variable exceeds (or lies below) a **threshold**. This threshold can be **relative** (e.g., the number of days when maximum daily temperature is above the 90th percentile for that calendar day over a base period) or **absolute** (e.g., the number of days in which maximum daily temperature is above $35^{\circ}C$).

Changes in extremes have also been examined from two perspectives: changes in the **frequency** for a given magnitude of extremes, or changes in the **magnitude** for a particular return period (frequency). Changes in the probability of extremes (e.g., temperature extremes) depend on the rarity of the extreme event that is assessed, with a larger change in probability associated with a rarer event. However, changes in the magnitude, represented by the return levels of the extreme events, may not be as sensitive to the rarity of the event.

The sensitivity of changes in extremes to increasing global warming is also dependent on the definition of the considered extremes.
* When similar damage occurs once a fixed threshold is exceeded, it is more important to ask a question regarding changes in the **frequency**. But when the exceedance of this fixed threshold becomes a normal occurrence in the future, this can lead to a saturation in the change of probability.
* If the impact of an event increases with the intensity of the event, it would be more relevant to examine changes in the **magnitude**.

Finally, **adaptation** to climate change might change the relevant thresholds over time, although such aspects are still rarely integrated into assessments.

## 2.2 Data
A robust determination of long-term changes in extreme events requires high-quality data over long periods. In general, it is more difficult to determine long-term changes for events of fairly large temporal duration, such as **‘megadroughts’** that last several years or longer, because of the limitations of the **observational sample size**.

Extreme indices computed from various **reanalysis data products** have been used in some studies, but reanalysis extreme statistics have not been rigorously compared to observations. There is often lower agreement across reanalysis datasets for extreme precipitation, especially in regions with sparse observations.

**Satellite remote sensing data** have been used to provide information about precipitation extremes because several products provide data at sub-daily resolution for precipitation and clouds. However, satellites do not observe the primary atmospheric state variables directly, and polar-orbiting satellites do not observe any given place at all times. Hence, their utility as a substitute for high-frequency (i.e., daily) ground-based observations is limited.

## 2.3 Attribution of Extremes
Attribution science identifies the causes for changes in the climate system. One method, **optimal fingerprinting**, faces specific challenges when applied to the detection and attribution of trends in extremes and on regional scales where the lower signal-to-noise ratio is a challenge. In particular, the method generally requires the data to follow a Normal (Gaussian) distribution, which is often not the case for extremes. However, recent studies showed that extremes can be transformed to a Gaussian distribution, for example, by averaging over space, so that optimal fingerprinting techniques can still be used. Non-stationary extreme value distributions, which allow for the detailed detection and attribution of regional trends in temperature extremes, have also been used.

A more commonly used approach is the **'probability-based approach'** (also called the 'risk-based approach'), which produces statements such as ‘anthropogenic climate change made this event type twice as likely’ or ‘anthropogenic climate change made this event 15% more intense’. This is done by estimating probability distributions of the index characterizing the event in today’s climate, as well as in a counterfactual climate without human influence, and either comparing intensities for a given occurrence probability (e.g., a 1-in-100-year event) or probabilities for a given magnitude. This method encompasses various analytical techniques, building on observations, statistical analyses, climate models (regional and global), and large ensembles. A key component in any event attribution analysis is the level of **conditioning on the state of the climate system**.

More **conditional approaches** involve prescribing certain aspects of the climate system, from sea surface temperature patterns to large-scale atmospheric circulation. These highly conditional approaches have also been called **‘storylines’** and can be useful when applied to extreme events that are too rare to otherwise analyze, or where the specific atmospheric conditions were central to the impact. These methods are also used to enable the use of very high-resolution simulations in cases where lower-resolution models do not simulate the regional atmospheric dynamics well. However, the imposed conditions limit an overall assessment of the anthropogenic influence on an event, as the fixed aspects of the analysis may also have been affected by climate change. Combining conditional assessments of changes in the intensity with a multi-model approach should be performed, since storylines alone preclude any attribution statement about the change in frequency.

The **storyline approach** provides an alternative option that does not depend on the model’s ability to represent the circulation reliably. For the unconditional **probability-based approach**, multi-model and multi-approach (e.g., combining observational analyses and model experiments) methods have been used to improve the robustness of event attribution.

---
# n. Box
## n.1 Box | Thermodynamic and Dynamic Changes in Extreme Across Scales
A key concept for understanding how extremes are changing is the distinction between thermodynamic and dynamic processes.

>Changes in weather and climate extremes are determined by local exchanges in heat, moisture, and other related quantities (**thermodynamic changes**) and those associated with atmospheric and oceanic motions (**dynamic changes**). While thermodynamic and dynamic processes are interconnected, considering them separately helps to disentangle the roles of different processes contributing to changes in climate extremes.
>
>* **Temperature Extremes**
>    The **water vapour feedback** always amplifies the initial temperature increases (positive feedback), while the **lapse rate feedback** (change in the vertical profile of temperature) amplifies near-surface temperature increases (positive feedback) in mid- and high latitudes but reduces temperature increases (negative feedback) in tropical regions. Thermodynamic responses and feedbacks also occur through surface processes. For instance, observations and model simulations show that temperature increases, including extreme temperatures, are amplified in areas where seasonal snow cover is reduced due to decreases in surface albedo. In some mid-latitude areas, temperature increases are amplified by the higher atmospheric evaporative demand that results in a drying of soils in some regions, leading to increased sensible heat fluxes (**soil-moisture–temperature feedback**). Other thermodynamic feedback processes include changes in the water-use efficiency of plants under enhanced atmospheric carbon dioxide ($CO_2$) concentrations that can reduce the overall transpiration, and thus also enhance temperature in projections. Changes in the spatial distribution of temperatures can also affect temperature extremes by modifying the characteristics of weather patterns. For example, a robust thermodynamic effect of **polar amplification** is a weakened north-south temperature gradient, which amplifies the warming of cold extremes in the Northern Hemisphere mid- and high latitudes because of the reduction of cold air advection.
>
>* **Precipitation Extremes**
>    Changes in temperature also control changes in water vapour through increases in evaporation and in the water-holding capacity of the atmosphere. At the global scale, column-integrated water vapour content increases roughly following the **Clausius–Clapeyron (C-C) relation**, with an increase of approximately 7% per $1^{\circ}C$ of global-mean surface warming. Nonetheless, at regional scales, water vapour increases differ from this C-C rate due to several reasons, including a change in weather regimes and limitations in moisture transport from the ocean, which warms more slowly than land. Observational studies have shown that the observed rate of increased precipitation extremes is similar to the C-C rate at the global scale. Climate model projections show that the increase in water vapour leads to robust increases in precipitation extremes everywhere, with a magnitude that varies between 4% and 8% per $1^{\circ}C$ of surface warming (thermodynamic contribution). At regional scales, climate models show that the dynamic contribution can be substantial and strongly modify the projected rate of change of extreme precipitation, with large regions in the subtropics showing robust reductions and other areas (e.g., equatorial Pacific) showing robust amplifications. Dynamic contributions can occur in response to changes in the vertical and horizontal distribution of temperature (thermodynamics) and can affect the frequency and intensity of synoptic and subsynoptic phenomena, including tropical cyclones, extratropical cyclones, fronts, mesoscale-convective systems and thunderstorms. For example, the poleward shift and strengthening of the Southern Hemisphere mid-latitude storm tracks can modify the frequency or intensity of extreme precipitation. However, the precise way in which dynamic changes will affect precipitation extremes is unclear due to several competing effects. The extra latent heat released within storms has been shown to increase precipitation extremes by strengthening convective updrafts and the intensity of the cyclonic circulation. As these dynamic effects result from feedback processes within storms where convective processes are crucial, their proper representation might require improving the horizontal/vertical resolution, the formulation of parametrizations, or both, in current climate models.
>
>* **Droughts**
>    Thermodynamic processes affect droughts by increasing **atmospheric evaporative demand** through changes in air temperature, radiation, wind speed, and relative humidity. Dynamic processes affect droughts through changes in the occurrence, duration and intensity of weather anomalies, which are related to precipitation and the amount of sunlight.
>
>In summary, both thermodynamic and dynamic processes are involved in the changes of extremes in response to warming. Anthropogenic forcing (e.g., increases in greenhouse gas concentrations) directly affects thermodynamic variables, including overall increases in high temperatures and atmospheric evaporative demand, and regional changes in atmospheric moisture, which intensify heatwaves, droughts and heavy precipitation events when they occur (*high confidence*). Dynamic processes are often indirect responses to thermodynamic changes, are strongly affected by internal climate variability, and are also less well understood. As such, there is *low confidence* in how dynamic changes affect the location and magnitude of extreme events in a warming climate.

## n.2 Box | Changes in Low-likelihood, High-impact Extremes
Climate science must also contend with the challenge of unanticipated events that, while improbable, could have exceptionally severe impacts.

>Unanticipated **Low-likelihood, high-impact (LLHI) events** can either result from **tipping points** in the climate system, such as the shutdown of the Atlantic thermohaline circulation or the drydown of the Amazonian rainforest, or from uncertainties in climate processes, including climate feedbacks, that may enhance or damp extremes. The low confidence does not by itself exclude the possibility of such events occuring; rather, it indicates a poor state of knowledge.
>
>There are some events that are sufficiently rare that they have not been observed in meteorological records, but whose occurrence is nonetheless plausible within the current state of the climate system. The rare nature of such events and the limited availability of relevant data makes it difficult to estimate their occurrence probability and thus gives little evidence on whether to include such hypothetical events in planning decisions and risk assessments. Additionally, there is also a limitation of available resources to exhaust all plausible trajectories of the climate system. As a result, there will still be events that cannot be anticipated. These events can be surprises to many in that the events have not been experienced, although their occurrence could be inferred by statistical means or physical modelling approaches.
>
>Another approach consists in using physical climate models to create a physically self-consistent **storyline** of plausible extreme events and assessing their impacts and driving factors in past or future conditions. Attributing and projecting very rare events in a particular location by assessing their likelihood of occurrence within the same larger region and climate thus provides another way to make quantitative assessments regarding events that are extremely rare locally.
>
>One factor making such events hard to anticipate is the fact that we now live in a **non-stationary climate**, and that the framework of reference for adaptation is continuously moving. Furthermore, when other aspects of the risk, vulnerability, and exposure are historically high or have recently increased, relatively moderate extremes can have very high impacts. Another factor making events high-impact and difficult to anticipate is that several locations under moderate warming levels could be affected simultaneously, or very repeatedly by different types of extremes. Therefore, in order to estimate whether, and at what level of global warming, very high impacts arising from extremes would occur, the spatial extent of extremes and the potential of **compounding extremes** need to be assessed.
>
>**Compound events**, including concurrent extremes, are a factor increasing the probability of LLHI events (*high confidence*). With increasing global warming, some compound events with low likelihood in past and current climate will become more frequent, and there is a higher chance of historically unprecedented events and **surprises** (*high confidence*). However, even extreme events that do not have a particularly low probability in the present climate (at more than $1^{\circ}C$ of global warming) can be perceived as surprises because of the pace of global warming (*high confidence*).
